# Variable Binary Encoded Dictionary Notes

Manu Chatterjee
2003.06.25 
Continued from Notes 2002.09.04

-----------------------------------------

VBE Dict is a binary encoded dictionary format which handles compound lists of
the form:

word0	freq	association[s]
word1	freq	association[s]

where 
+freq may not be present
+associations[s] may be one of 
  +may not be present
  +association may be a single value which represents an address
  +association may be a list of values/characters

Note that the character set (number base) used to encode (word) 
may be different than the char set used to encode associations.

The header for VBEDict includes:
variables for word:
	sint32	:min value to add to produce output encoding
	uint8	:# bits used per character for word
variables for freq
	boolean	:freq is present
	sint32	:min value to add for freq
	uint8	:# bits used per for freq
variables for association[s]
	sint32	:min value to add to characters to produce output encoding
	uint8	:# bits used per character for association
	uint8	:min number of associations per terminal char
	uint8	:max number of associations per terminal char 
	(note that if min==max ) the num of associations on any branch will be the same, hence
	the number of associations will only be explicitly stated in the header in this case.
-----------------------------------------
Example:


wonder
wondering
womb
wombat
world
worry
worrying
worries

 8 words
50 characters
58 characters with null terminators


------------------------------------
Tree based representation:
Note: 0 represents null terminator

w-o+n-d-e-r+0
   |       |
   |       +i-n-g-0
   |
   +m-b+0
   |   |
   |   +a-t-0
   |
   +r+l-d-0
     |
	 +r+y+0
	   | |
	   | +i-n-g-0
	   |
	   +i-e-s-0

------------------------------------
First step flattened representation:
( == Push
) == Pop

(wo(nder()ing)(mb()at)r(ld)r(y()ing)ies))

It is after this step that common subtrees (substrings) are easily identifed for 
morph compression.  In this example the morst are:
()ing)

Note that morphs are stored in a separate tree of same encoding.
and that potentially, such submorphs could again be be encoded recursively until
benefits of size/speed are met.

------------------------------------
Second step flattened representation:

In the fist step we used push and pop operators in the stream to identify
the next level or end of a level in the tree.  Now we change this to removing the
push with a SkipTo(addr) operator and remove the pop operator completely.  The
SkipTo(add) operator is a Vint, while pop is no longer necessary as the last Push 
operator is will skip to the address to just after the pop.  Hence when this address
is reached we know a pop would have occurred.  While we lose some compression by replacing
the Push/Pop with Vint, we gain speed of search (we can skip around the tree reasonably
efficiently).
The Skip(addr) operator represent numbers in one of two ways:
1. If the characters are encoded with the same number of bits, then Skip(addr) is the 
number of characters skipped.  For example if chars are 7 bit quantities, Then this 
provides a 7x efficiency in Vint representation as a Skip(3) value represents 21 bits
to skip.
2. If the characters are encoded in a variable size manner (such as Huffman coded) then
the Skip(addr) is the number of bits to jump.

(wo(nder()ing)(mb()at)r(ld)r(y()ing)ies))
|  |    ++   ||  ++  | +--+ | ++   |   ||
   +---------++-------


=====

string : value

?? allow value to be compound.  eg [ ] or another dict?

string : string     <-- 
string : hex_str    <-- allows less bits per symbol

string : number up to 64 bit     <-- allows less bits per symbol can be 
    --> if num size is fixed across whole dict, can use fixed num bits based in max num
    --> or can use varnum 



actions:
txz.find(key)  --> returns value if exists.

header_enc:
bits_per_sym_key
bits_per_sym_val
value_type (str, hex_str, var_num)


special symbols:
. end_of_key (no values)
! end_of_key (value[s])
^ skip(num_syms or bits or bit-multiples) :: skip(var_num) # bit multiples if say using 5 bits per symbol
: suffix substitution(number of suffix)  
\ escape_literal


logically represented here:
. end
^ skip 
_ end with value   # can be used with suffix ref
! end with values  # can be used with suffix reg
: suffix           #
\ escape_literal   # eg \_ <-- literal '_'

the symbols, if used inline can be stored in an array in the header in a fixed pos so that different chars can be chosen to minimize escaping.

e.g:
[ .^_!:\ ] <-- six chars in a row stored in header map directly to above uses.  Now when the encoder is scanning the symbol list it can choose chars with minimal escaping needs.

mapping suffix endings with diff values.
if values are not stored suffixes can be stored by substitution.
if values __are__ stored then store values as an array (?)

(wo(nder()ing)(mb()at)r(ld)r(y()ing)ies)) 
(wo(nder.ing)(mb.at)r(ld)r(y.ing)ies))

for the common suffixes
worked      1
workings    2 
worded      3
wordings    4
worm        5

(wor(k(ed)ings)(d(ed)ings)m)  #keys only using push, pop operators

(wor(k(ed!1)ings!2)(d(ed!3)ings!4)m!5)  #keys with values

(wor(k:)(d:)m)  #keys with suffix subs
: suffix substituion --> (ed)ing

(wor(k:!1,2)(d:!3,4)m!5)  #keys with suffix subs and values
: suffix substituion --> (ed)ing

suffixes ... stored as separate 
    ? list
    ? trie


could have separate look up table e.g. trie is just a string w no symbols.
LUT is 
pos:action / value
-- eliminates need for special symbols and escaping




=====
